Event sourcing (#2)
MaximeVivier/Articles: blog-posts/event-sourcing-serveless/event-sourcing-serveless.md

---
published: false
title: 'A prod-safe event sourcing architecture has never been so simple to implement in AWS serverless'
cover_image:
description: 'Description of the article'
tags: serverless, eventsourcing, AWS, CQRS
series:
canonical_url:
---

> :money_with_wings: Bank applications are one of the type of business requiring to **store a trace of all events** and **use the history** - just to name a few, accounting, medical records, transportation logistics... If you you're about to implement a **serverless** architecture for an event sourcing based application, you are in the right place. This article aims at sharing with you **2 years of learnings** :heart_eyes:, saving you the trouble to make the same mistakes I did, and providing you with a guidebook to have the most stable and the least painful solution you can go with. :rocket:

Reviewer: Echange tes premières phrases, c'est mieux pour le SEO de caller un max de mot clef dans la première phrase "serverless" et "event sourcing" devrait être dans la première phrase

```json
{
  "userId": "163082d2-b005-75d7-5eb6-aa1f83efd55d",
  "eventType": "Debit",
  "payload": {
    "amount": 30
  },
  "version": 3
}
```

```json
{
  "aggregate": {
    "totalBalance": 500,
    "lastMonthBalance": -20
  },
  "lastEvent": {
    "userId": "163082d2-b005-75d7-5eb6-aa1f83efd55d",
    "eventType": "Debit",
    "payload": {
      "amount": 30
    },
    "version": 3
  }
}
```

## A trick that simplifies also the job of the projectors

Now projectors have access to the exact value of the projection they each handle and the version of the event it comes from. So it's not necessary to update the projection based on the previous value anymore. The projector can **simply** use the **PutItem** command of DynamoDB to **overwrite the previous** value only if the version incoming is strictly superior to current one stored.

> <img src="./assets/archiWithDispatchAggregate.png" display="block" style="display: block; margin: auto" width="1200"/>

Reviewer: met l'image plus tôt, introduit ta super soluce d'aggregat rapidement puis explique que c'est cool pour chacun des points ci dessus

---
published: false

> title: 'A prod-proof AWS serverless event-sourcing architecture has never been so simple to implement'

Reviewer 2: Ça veut dire quoi prod-proof ? Je suis pas sûr que l'implémentation ait comme argument majeur la simplicité. Tu peux mettre d'autres arguments en avant cependant - comme le fait que c'est intégralement manage, pas cher ou scalable :)

cover_image:
description: 'Description of the article'
tags: serverless, eventsourcing, AWS, CQRS
series:
canonical_url:
---

# Introduction

You probably use a bank application in your every day life and you wonder how they work. Every credit and debit transaction you make is stored as an event in a data store. This event data store is the source of truth and the current state of your account is computed from all events stored in the datastore. This is known as event sourcing.

<img src="./assets/compute-event-sourcing-state.png" style="display: block; margin: auto" width="200"/>

Numerous applications need to store a trace of all events to use the history or even for legal purposes such as a bank. If you share this need and you're thinking about implementing it in serverless, you are in the right place. Thus I want to share with you, 2 years of learnings that will lead you to have the most stable and the less painful solution you can go with.

## Event sourcing's best friend interface is CQRS

> CQRS (Command and Query Responsibility Segregation) is a pattern that separates read and write operations for a data store solution. In our case the credit and debit events are written into a database different from the database which the data is read from.

Reviewer 3: C'est pas hyper facile de comprendre la dernière phrase `In our case the credit and debit events are written into a database different from the database which the data is read from.`

Reviewer 2: Le CQRS n'est pas un pattern de stockage de data, ça n'a pas de lien avec le data store. C'est un pattern de séparation des opérations sur l'interface (HTTP par exemple) d'un système.

Reviewer 2: Le CQRS n'est pas un pattern de stockage de data, ça n'a pas de lien avec le data store. C'est un pattern de séparation des opérations sur l'interface (HTTP par exemple) d'un système.

> It's a good thing to know CQRS to better grasp what will be approached in this article, but don't worry it is not required. Numerous resources already deal with this topic and you can easily look it up on the web.

Reviewer 3: Si y a un article légendaire / plébiscité tu peux le linker ici ? Pour appuyer le fait que c'est pas dans ton scope ?

## What we will build together

> Let's build the example of the banking application. It needs to display both the balance of your account and the last transaction you made. We will have a much bigger need in reading resources than in writing, therefore CQRS is appropriate for the use case. Moreover, CQRS is the best reading/writing interface for an event sourcing data storing solution. For now let's take a look at what the architecture of such an application should look like.

Reviewer 2: Pourquoi t'aura plus de lectures que d'écritures ? Je paie plus souvent avec ma CB que je ne consulte mon compte en banque ^^

<img src="./assets/event-sourcing-x-CQRS-simple-schema.png" style="display: block; margin: auto" width="600"/>

If you are user 2, you see that the application will fetch the total balance of your account from a read model that is called a **projection**. The entity that handles that action is called a query (cQrs). The projection of the balance is computed from the events stored in a database called the **event store**. A data synchronization system must be implemented to have accurate reading data compared to the source of truth. And when you make a transaction, a request is made to a **command** (Cqrs) that will write in the event store the event.

Now let's see how to implement it with AWS serverless technologies.

## Event Store

> The source of truth of the application is the event store. All credit and debit events for every user are stored in it. We want a quick to access serverless database, therefore DynamoDB is the most appropriate. We have to define the access pattern to retrieve every events of a user in a chronological order. We can store the number of the event in a field named **version** and put it as `sort key` (SK). To easily retrieve data from a specific user we can use the **id of a user** as a `partition key` (PK). That way we have a composite primary key with the PK and the SK.

Reviewer 2: La raison pour laquelle on utilise DynamoDB c'est les access pattern, pas la perf. La perf d'un DB SQL est potentiellement bonne aussi. Tu t'ouvres également à des détracteurs qui te demanderons pourquoi pas TimeStream ou Kafka pour faire le ledger. Je te recommande de soit faire un petit ADR qui explicite la raison de ce choix, soit de pas parler du tout de pourquoi DynamoDB.

<img src="./assets/event-store-schema.png" style="display: block; margin: auto" width="600"/>

We start building our application. The event store represents its first block, and it contains credit and debit events of every user.

<img src="./assets/archi-step-1-event-store.png" style="display: block; margin: auto" height="300"/>

> > :face_with_monocle: It is nice to be able to store data, but the question now is how do we store them?

Reviewer 3: Deux fois store ?

## Command

> We need to fuel this event store with some events. The command, which is the C of CQRS interface, is in charge of this. It's basically a handler that writes an event into the event store when triggered.

Reviewer 3: Fuel ça veut dire "to provide power to something" du coup c'est ça que tu voulais dire ?
(ça veut pas dire "remplir")

Coming back to the purchase of your 100$ blue jeans, how do we know that you only have 50$ left and that you can't perform this debit transaction only based on former transactions. That's where we build a tool named aggregate to compute the current balance. Before creating an event in the command, we query on the partition key with your id and we get a sorted list of your events based on the version of each one. Then we simply replay every debit and credit event in a reducer and output the total balance of the account. Unfortunately the computation of the balance reveals that you can't afford these blue jeans and we are able to send an error back.

<img src="./assets/aggregate-schema.png" style="display: block; margin: auto" height="150"/>

Likewise, we might need some business verification for the credit transaction. Thus our architecture should include a feedback loop between the command and the event store.

<img src="./assets/archi-step-3-aggregate.png" style="display: block; margin: auto" height="300"/>

> At this moment we are able to write consistent data in our source of truth. But we don't serve data from the event store directly. We will implement database for read models.

Reviewer 3: On comprend pas forcément cette phrase `We will implement database for read models.`
Tu veux dire qu'il y a une db séparée pour créer des read models?

## Query

Our application doesn't show anything for the moment because we don't fetch any data. It communicates via HTTP request to retrieve data. And we can query data from DynamoDB from a lambda function which rightly named Query, aka the Q in CQRS. Hence we can use the same type of interface as the command : an HTTP API Gateway combined with a lambda function that retrieves the correct data.

You go to your application to see the last transaction occurred into your account to be sure you emitted it. By navigating to the page where you can see it, a GET request is sent to the url <code>account/{accountId}/<b>last-transaction</b></code>. A lambda is then triggered, it queries the projection DynamoDB with the required parameters `{ 'accountId': 'abcd1234-user2, 'projectionName': 'LastTransaction' }`. It sends back the data synchronously to the frontend for it to display to you your last transaction recorded, and fortunately you are the emitter.

We have the two sides of the CQRS architecture, with the writing in the command and the reading in the query.

<img src="./assets/archi-step-5-query.png" style="display: block; margin: auto" width="1000"/>

> But there is a big part missing here. How do we transform data from events to projections? How is the synchronization between read and write models ensured?

Reviewer 3: Stylé la transi gg

The pain point in CQRS is to have reliable reading data compared to the source of truth. We need to find a way to compute and write projections according to events written in the event store.

### Projector

For the writing part, we have already done the job in the previous development. We will simply use lambda functions to put data in DynamoDB. These lambda are called projectors.

But where does the data come from? It's legitimate to think about Event Bridge events to carry data to trigger lambda. For example, the total balance projector can be triggered by a debit event of 20$ `{ 'eventType': 'Debit', 'amount': 20}`. The DynamoDB UpdateItem method allows us to manipulate the value of an existing record without querying it beforehand. In the case of a debit we can simply subtract 20 to the existing value of the projection. The same projector can listen to credit event also and update the projection the same way. We can think of updating the last transaction with an event carrying `{ 'eventType': 'Credit', 'amount': 40}` by overwriting the previous value of the projection.

<img src="./assets/archi-step-6-projector.png" style="display: block; margin: auto" width="1200"/>

> We still don't know how are created these events carrying the data that is written in the event store.

Reviewer 3: Problème de syntaxe dans cette phrase

### DynamoDB streams and fanout lambda

We want to react in real time to events written inside the event store. For that DynamoDb gives us a powerful tool that is called DynamoDB streams. We plug a lambda to the streams that will be triggered by every action made in the database. DynamoDB batches its streams of events in arrays, so we filter the `INSERT` actions and for each of them we publish an event in Amazon EventBridge.

> :question: You may wonder why not directly plug projector to the streams

For 3 reasons:

> - A lambda that is plugged to the streams and that fails will retry indefinitely

Reviewer 2: C'est pas la lambda qui est retried, c'est l'événement :)

> - In every projector you would have to handle the filtering of events, and every projector would be triggered by every event

Reviewer 2: Je comprends pas ta phrase -> la dernière raison - la limitation à 2 lambda - est la raison pour laquelle on ne ship pas les projecteurs directement sur DynamoDB streams, mais tu peux filtrer comme sur évent bridge -> http://serverless.com//blog/guest-post-developing-a-serverless-scheduler-using-dynamodb-ttl-and-filtered-streams

- You can only plug 2 lambda to the streams

> > :warning: not sure of the exact reasons :warning:

Reviewer 3: J'ai pas compris

This type of handler is called a fanout, it delivers events to one or multiple recipients. By doing so, each projector only needs to listen to event altering the data it's associated to. For example a projector writing user individual information such as the name family name and address doesn't need to be triggered by a credit event.

Our architecture seems now complete, from the emission of the event, to the writing of it, then the synchronization of the read models and eventually the reading of this new data.

<img src="./assets/archi-step-7-fanout.png" display="block" style="display: block; margin: auto" width="1200"/>

## Replay

This works fine in dev when you're not yet in production. But with this data synchronization architecture you will face bugs later on. Let me explain :

> - When traffic is starting to grow, more and more events will flow and one thing EventBridge doesn't ensure is the order of the events sent in the bus event. You must keep the last version of the event that updated the projection not to overwrite a more recent information.

Reviewer 3: would recommend "when traffic starts to grow"

---
published: false
title: 'A prod-proof AWS serverless event-sourcing architecture has never been so simple to implement'
cover_image:
description: 'Description of the article'
tags: serverless, event-sourcing, AWS, CQRS
series:
canonical_url:
---

# Introduction

> You probably use a bank application in your every day life and you wonder how they work. Every credit and debit transaction you make is stored as an event in a data store. This event data store is the source of truth and the current state of your account is computed from all events stored in the datastore. This is known as event sourcing.

Reviewer 4: J'aurais bien mis un paragraphe / catch line qu dit en une phrase que tu vas montrer comment implementer l'event sourcing en serverless des le debut, avant l'ex de la banque pour catch l'attention

Reviewer 2: Idéalement ton lecteur sait en lisant la première phrase de quoi tu vas parler et si le contenu est pertinent pour lui. Sinon tu lui demande de faire un effort sans qu'il sache ce que ça va donner et la plupart du temps il choisit de pas le faire

Reviewer 2: Regarde le paragraphe d'intro de https://medium.com/serverless-transformation/service-ports-finding-a-loosely-coupled-utopia-with-event-driven-serverless-6964aacd1487
L'idée de raccrocher les wagons en parlant de banque est une bonne intuition, mais la plupart des lecteurs vont décrocher si tu tournes autour du pot

<img src="./assets/compute-event-sourcing-state.png" style="display: block; margin: auto" width="200"/>

Numerous applications need to store a trace of all events to use the history or even for legal purposes such as a bank. If you share this need and you're thinking about implementing it in serverless, you are in the right place. Thus I want to share with you, 2 years of learnings that will lead you to have the most stable and the less painful solution you can go with.

## Event sourcing's best friend interface is CQRS

CQRS (Command and Query Responsibility Segregation) is a pattern that separates read and write operations for a data store solution. In our case the credit and debit events are written into a database different from the database which the data is read from.

> It's a good thing to grasp a bit what it is to understand better what will be approached in this article, but don't worry it is not required as it is quite straightforward. Still numerous resources already deal with this topic that you can easily look up on the web.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It's a good thing to know CQRS to better grasp what will be approached in this article, but don't worry it is not required. Numerous resources already deal with this topic and you can easily look it up on the web.
```

## What we will build together

Let's build the example of the banking application. It needs to display both the balance of your account and the last transaction you made. We will have a much bigger need in reading resources than in writing, therefore CQRS is appropriate for the use case. Moreover, CQRS is the best reading/writing interface for an event sourcing data storing solution. For now let's take a look at what the architecture of such an application should look like.

<img src="./assets/event-sourcing-x-CQRS-simple-schema.png" style="display: block; margin: auto" width="600"/>

> If you are user 2, you see that the application will fetch the the total balance of your account from a read model that is called a **projection**. The entity that handles that action is called a query (cQrs). The projection of the balance is computed from the events stored in a database called the **event store**. A data synchronization system must be implemented to have accurate reading data compared to the source of truth. And when you make a transaction, a request is made to a **command** (Cqrs) that will write in the event store the event.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If you are user 2, you see that the application will fetch the total balance of your account from a read model that is called a **projection**. The entity that handles that action is called a query (cQrs). The projection of the balance is computed from the events stored in a database called the **event store**. A data synchronization system must be implemented to have accurate reading data compared to the source of truth. And when you make a transaction, a request is made to a **command** (Cqrs) that will write in the event store the event.
```

> If you are user 2, you see that the application will fetch the the total balance of your account from a read model that is called a **projection**. The entity that handles that action is called a query (cQrs). The projection of the balance is computed from the events stored in a database called the **event store**. A data synchronization system must be implemented to have accurate reading data compared to the source of truth. And when you make a transaction, a request is made to a **command** (Cqrs) that will write in the event store the event.

Reviewer 4: the en trop

Now let's see how to implement it with AWS serverless technologies.

> # Plan

Reviewer: t'as toujours besoin de ça ?

## EVENT STORE

The source of truth of the application is the event store. All credit and debit events for every user are stored in it. We want a quick to access serverless database, therefore DynamoDB is the most appropriate. We have to define the access pattern to retrieve every events of a user in a chronological order. We can store the number of the event in a field named **version** and put it as `sort key` (SK). To easily retrieve data from a specific user we can use the **id of a user** as a `partition key` (PK). That way we have a composite primary key with the PK and the SK.

<img src="./assets/event-store-schema.png" style="display: block; margin: auto" width="600"/>

> We start building our application. The event store represents the first block of i, and it contains credit and debit events of every user.

Reviewer 4: its first block

<img src="./assets/archi-step-1-event-store.png" style="display: block; margin: auto" height="300"/>

> It is nice to be able to store data, but the question now is how do we store them.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It is nice to be able to store data, but the question now is how do we store them. 🧐
```

We now have our writing side with two routes, one for the debit transactions and one for credit transactions. Each route triggers a lambda that writes the event into the event store.

<img src="./assets/archi-step-2-command.png" style="display: block; margin: auto" height="300"/>

But we face an issue here. What happens if you want to buy blue jeans for 100$ but you only have 50$ and considering that we don't accept overdraft ? We need **a way to know the current balance of your account** to implement some **business logic** to avoid unauthorized transactions. The computation of the current state of the account in question is called the aggregate.

## AGGREGATE

You need to remember that the source of truth of your application is the event store. Therefore when you want to make business verifications you have to do it on the event store and not on the projection which is only the read model.

> Coming back to the purchase of your 100$ blue jeans, how do we know that you only have 50$ left and that you can't perform this debit transaction only based on former transactions. That's where we build a tool named aggregate to compute the current balance. Before creating an event in the command, we query on the partition key with your id and we get a sorted list of your events based on the version of each one. Then we simply replay every debit and credit event in a reducer and output the total balance of the account. Unfortunately the computation of the balance reveals that you can't afford these blue jeans and we are able to send an error back.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Coming back to the purchase of your 100$ blue jeans, how do we know that you only have 50$ left and that you can't perform this debit transaction only based on former transactions?
Before creating an event in the command, we query on the partition key with your id and we get a sorted list of your events based on the version of each one. Then we replay every debit and credit event in a reducer and output the total balance of the account: that's our aggregate. Unfortunately the computation of the aggregate reveals that you can't afford these blue jeans and we are able to send an error back.
```

<img src="./assets/aggregate-schema.png" style="display: block; margin: auto" height="150"/>

Likewise, we might need some business verification for the credit transaction. Thus our architecture should include a feedback loop between the command and the event store.

<img src="./assets/archi-step-3-aggregate.png" style="display: block; margin: auto" height="300"/>

At this moment we are able to write consistent data in our source of truth. But we don't serve data from the event store directly. We will implement database for read models.

## PROJECTION

> First thing first, where do we store our data ? As banking application, the number of read actions is going to be substantial. Also as the number of clients increases we need to have automatic scalable resources to absorb the growing traffic without giving too much thoughts about it. For these reasons we are going to go also with DynamoDB to create the projections database.

Reviewer 4: things

> Then how do we shape our data ? The main purpose of CQRS is to split writing and reading data, so we can optimize the reading models to be as fast as possible. In order to be the fastest when reading data is to read directly what what you will display. So the purpose of the read models projections is to store data as it is viewed in the application, each projection represent a business entity. As the amount of storage is not the issue but the running time is, this is the most efficient way to store data event if it means duplicate some parts of read models data.

Reviewer 4: pas clair la phrase in order to be the fastest ..

> In our use case, we want to display the total balance of your account and the last transaction you made. For that purpose we will simply store these to data for every user. We configure the id of the user as the partition key, that way every projection regarding the same user is stored in the partition. We need to be able to fetch certain projection and filter others, so we put the type of projection as the sort key. The access pattern allow efficient access to displayable data.

Reviewer 4: store these data*

## QUERY

Our application doesn't show anything for the moment because we don't fetch any data. It communicates via HTTP request to retrieve data. And we can query data from DynamoDB from a lambda function which rightly named Query, aka the Q in CQRS. Hence we can use the same type of interface as the command : an HTTP API Gateway combined with a lambda function that retrieves the correct data.

You go to your application to see the last transaction occurred into your account to be sure you emitted it. By navigating to the page where you can see it, a GET request is sent to the url <code>account/{accountId}/<b>last-transaction</b></code>. A lambda is then triggered, it queries the projection DynamoDB with the required parameters `{ 'accountId': 'abcd1234-user2, 'projectionName': 'LastTransaction' }`. It sends back the data synchronously to the frontend for it to display to you your last transaction recorded, and fortunately you are the emitter.

We have the two sides of the CQRS architecture, with the writing in the command and the reading in the query.

<img src="./assets/archi-step-5-query.png" style="display: block; margin: auto" width="1000"/>

> But there is a big part missing here. How do transform data from events to projections ? How is the synchronization between read and write models ensured ?

Reviewer 4: do we

Reviewer 4: + pas d'espace entre phrase et ❓

### PROJECTOR

For the writing part, we have already done the job in the previous development. We will simply use lambda functions to put data in DynamoDB. These lambda are called projectors.

But where does the data come from ? It's legitimate to think about Event Bridge events to carry data to trigger lambda. For example, the total balance projector can be triggered by a debit event of 20$ `{ 'eventType': 'Debit', 'amount': 20}`. The DynamoDB UpdateItem method allows us to manipulate the value of an existing record without querying it beforehand. In the case of a debit we can simply subtract 20 to the existing value of the projection. The same projector can listen to credit event also and update the projection the same way. We can think of updating the last transaction with an event carrying `{ 'eventType': 'Credit', 'amount': 40}` by overwriting the previous value of the projection.

<img src="./assets/archi-step-6-projector.png" style="display: block; margin: auto" width="1200"/>

We still don't know how are created these events carrying the data that is written in the event store.

> ### DYNAMODB STREAMS AND FANOUT

Reviewer 4: fanout lambda*

> We want to react in live time to events written inside the event store. For that DynamoDb gives us a powerful tool that is called DynamoDB streams. We plug a lambda to the streams that will be triggered by every action made in the database. DynamoDB batches its streams of events in arrays, so we filter the `INSERT` actions and for each of them we publish an event in Amazon EventBridge.

Reviewer 4: real time p-e ?

## AGGREGATE DISPATCHER

The aggregate represents the current state of your data at the version of the latest event taken into account. Furthermore, we can output any data we want from the history of event, especially the data we want to be accessible in our read models. If so, we would only have to update the projection with the corresponding part of the aggregate if its version is more recent than the version of the projection itself.

The replay would only require to trigger an event listened by all projector in order to update all projections at once.

We can think of implementing state carried events which means attaching the aggregate to the dispatched events. This would be instead of computing it every time a projector is triggered and giving them all access to the event store. We will build a Lambda function that takes only one event in argument, computes the aggregate and attaches it to the event before republishing it. That way, we leave the responsibility to the fanout to transform an array of streams to published EventBridge events, and we don't want it to fail during that task.

> 

Reviewer 4: préciser que le petit drawback c'est que ça rajoute du temps car un cold start en + ?

Reviewer 4: + préciser que on a fait comme ça car il y a la feature event bridge archive ou replay jsplus qui permet de rejouer facilement

---
published: false

> title: 'The best way to do event sourcing in serverless'

Reviewer 2: An Event-Sourcing Architecture in an Event-Driven Technology, a Serverless State of the Art System

cover_image:
description: 'Description of the article'
tags: serverless, event-sourcing, AWS, CQRS
series:
canonical_url:
---

# Introduction

> You surely know git and it might be the best example of event-sourcing project that every developer know of. It stores every modifications you made in your code into events that are called commits, then the developer has access to the whole history of changes. If you want to implement a project that needs to access the history of what happened throughout the life of the user of even the whole application, then you are in the right place ! My 2 years learnings and the serverless paradigm will help you produce the most stable and the less painful solution you can think of.

Reviewer 2: et c'est pas vrai malheureusement, on dirait que git ne stocke que la différence à chaque commit, mais on réalité c'est un snapshot complet qui est utilisé : https://stackoverflow.com/questions/40617288/a-commit-in-git-is-it-a-snapshot-state-image-or-is-it-a-change-diff-patch-delta

Reviewer 2: Il faut que tu remontes le why de pourquoi quelqu'un lirait ton article, c'est quoi le problème que tu résout pour lui ?
C'est un peu gourmand de faire un article à la fois sur ce qu'est l'event-sourcing et le CQRS en plus de proposer une implémentation en serverless. Y'a plétore d'articles qui parle de ces concepts, mais beaucoup moins qui proposent une implémentation en serverless avec le why de chaque service utilisé. Je pense que c'est là que ton article a le plus de valeur.

Un truc qui pourrait être cool, c'est de faire un schéma d'archi technique sans service qui représente un système qui fonctionne en CQRS+event-sourcing, et d'axer ton article sur quels technologies tu vas utiliser pour implémenter chacun des blocs dans une archi serverless AWS

# Plan

> - **CQRS** : The event sourcing pattern uses the CQRS pattern to store and deliver data.

Reviewer 2: CQRS c'est le protocol de l'interface que tu donnes à l'utilisateur pour intéragir avec ton système, au même titre que REST, tous les deux basés sur de l'HTTP
Tu peux regarder https://martinfowler.com/bliki/CQRS.html pour te faire une bonne idée de ce que le terme englobe

Reviewer 2: Fais bien la différence avec l'event-sourcing qui est une solution de stockage, mais qui peut être mise en place avec une autre interface que le CQRS, c'est juste que ce dernier est particulièrement bien adapté ^^
Pareil, une bonne resource sur l'event-sourcing est https://martinfowler.com/eaaDev/EventSourcing.html

---
published: false
title: 'The best way to do event sourcing in serverless'
cover_image:

> description: 'Description of the article'

Reviewer: à mettre à jour ou à enlever

> tags: serverless, event-sourcing, AWS, CQRS

Reviewer: check dans l'UI dev.to mais je crois que tu es limité à 3 tags

Event sourcing is a way to implement the data store in a CQRS pattern interface. There are also a lot of resources on the internet about it if you want to quickly take a look at it before deep diving into our banking application.

## What we will build together

Let's build the example of the banking application. We want to store data with the event sourcing pattern to be able to create any data view models from the list of credit/debit events of a user. For reading and writing data, we want to set up a CQRS interface which fits perfectly with the event sourcing data storing system. For now Let's take a look at what the architecture of such an application should look like.

_insert schema of archi agnostic of technologies_

We have two projections, one to get the total balance of your account and one to get the current month balance. The synchronization of the read models with the event table which is the source of truth relies on an Event Driven Architecture. We react to writing events in the event table to trigger updates of the read models.

Now let's see how to implement it with AWS serverless technologies.

# Plan

> - **EVENT DB**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **EVENT LEDGER DB**
```
je crois que c'est le terme dédié

  - source of truth of your application data in which you store every event that occurs in your account.
  - Use DynamoDB to store credit/debit events
    - pk=idUser, sk='CreditEvent'|'DebitEvent', amount=number
  - Version is useful when updating projections that will be dealt later in the article.
- **COMMAND**

>   - API Gateway HTTP (simple vs. API Gateway REST qui est plus compliquée et plus chère)

Reviewer: pas sûr que le comparatif entre les deux api gateway soit pertinent dans cet article

  - Lmabda that is triggered by http route to store an event in db
    - one route/lambda to store a credit event

>     - one route/lambda to store a debit event

Reviewer: ça peut être bien de préciser qu'on fait ici la validation métier, qu'elle se fait à partir de l'aggregat, pas à partir des projections. De plus on récupère la version du dernier event pour éviter de créer deux événements conflictuels en même temps. On utilise les conditions d'écriture sur dynamoDb, pas un if dans le code.

Reviewer: il faut aussi présenter ce qu'est l'aggregat du coup ...

> - **EDA**

Reviewer: C'est quoi ?

  - The pain point to do event sourcing is to have reliable reading data, consistency compared to the source of truth. That's why we use an EDA with a fanout to do so.
  - **FANOUT**
    - Fanout that pushes the event to EventBridge (avoid infinite retries and only 2 lambdas plugged to DynamoDB streams). Dispatch a generic event that contains the payload and the type of it.
  - **DISPATCHER**
    - state carried event
      - compute the aggregate
        - list of events on 3 months
        - compute total
        - compute current month

>         - aggregate: { totalBalance: x, currentMonthBalance: y }

Reviewer: Du coup tu peux remonter cette partie là pour pouvoir parler de l'aggregat dans la commande
